Chat tutorials (#1206)
streamlit/docs: content/develop/tutorials/llms/chat-response-revision.md

                )
                st.session_state.pending = None
                st.session_state.validation = {}
                st.session_state.stage = "user"
                st.rerun()
            if cols[1].button("Re-validate"):
                st.session_state.validation = {}
                st.session_state.stage = "validate"
                st.rerun()

elif st.session_state.stage == "rewrite":
    st.chat_input("Accept, correct, or rewrite the answer above.", disabled=True)
    with st.chat_message("assistant"):
        new = st.text_area("Rewrite the answer", value=st.session_state.pending)
        if st.button(
            "Update", type="primary", disabled=new is None or new.strip(". ") == ""
        ):
            st.session_state.history.append({"role": "assistant", "content": new})
            st.session_state.pending = None
            st.session_state.validation = {}
            st.session_state.stage = "user"
            st.rerun()
```

</Collapse>

<Cloud name="doc-tutorial-chat-response-revision" height="600px" />

## Build the example

### Initialize your app

1. In `your_repository`, create a file named `app.py`.

> 1. In a terminal, change directories to `your_repository`, and start your app.

Reviewer: Same comment about using a colon to introduce code. I'm not going to mark all the instances.

   ```bash
   streamlit run app.py
   ```

   Your app will be blank because you still need to add code.

1. In `app.py`, write the following:

   ```python
   import streamlit as st
   import lorem
   from random import randint
   import time
   ```

   You'll use `lorem`, `random`, and `time` to build a simulated chat response stream.

1. Save your `app.py` file, and view your running app.
1. In your app, select "**Always rerun**", or press your "**A**" key.

>    Your preview will be blank but will automatically update as you save changes to `app.py`. Return to your code.

Reviewer: Same question about "return to your code." If this is an instruction, format it as such.

### Build a function to simulate a chat response stream

To begin, you'll define a function to stream a random chat response. The simulated chat stream will use `lorem` to generate three to nine random sentences. It's okay to skip this section if you just want to copy the function.

<Collapse title="Complete function to simulate a chat stream" expanded={false}>

```python
def chat_stream():
    for i in range(randint(3, 9)):
        yield lorem.sentence() + " "
        time.sleep(0.2)
```

</Collapse>

1. Define a function for your simulated chat stream.

   ```python
   def chat_stream():
   ```

   For this example, the chat stream does not have any arguments. The streamed response will be random and independent of the user's prompt.

1. Create a loop that executes three to nine times.

   ```python
       for i in range(randint(3, 9)):
   ```

1. Within the loop, yield a random sentence from `lorem` with a space at the end.

   ```python
           yield lorem.sentence() + " "
           time.sleep(0.2)
   ```

>    In order to create a streaming effect, use `time.sleep(0.2)` to create a small delay between yields. You now have a complete generator function to simulate a chat stream object.

Reviewer: Format this as a step. The second sentence should be a separate line that describes the entire procedure.

### Create a validation function

The app will validate the streamed responses to assist users in identifying possible errors. To validate a response, you'll first create a list of its sentences. Any sentence with fewer than six words will be marked as a potential error. This is an arbitrary standard for the sake of illustration.

> <Collapse title="Complete function to validate a response" expanded={false}>

Reviewer: What does this code represent? Should it be introduced with an instruction step?

```python
def validate(response):
    response_sentences = response.split(". ")
    response_sentences = [
        sentence.strip(". ") + "."
        for sentence in response_sentences
        if sentence.strip(". ") != ""
    ]
    validation_list = [
        True if sentence.count(" ") > 4 else False for sentence in response_sentences
    ]
    return response_sentences, validation_list
```

</Collapse>

> 1. Define a function that accepts a string response and breaks it apart into sentences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Define a function that accepts a string response and breaks it into sentences:
```

   ```python
   def validate(response):
       response_sentences = response.split(". ")
   ```

1. Use list comprehension to clean the list of sentences. For each sentence, strip any leading and trailing spaces and periods, and then restore a period to the end.

   ```python
       response_sentences = [
           sentence.strip(". ") + "."
           for sentence in response_sentences
           if sentence.strip(". ") != ""
       ]
   ```

>    Because the user will be modifying responses, whitespaces and punctuation may vary. `sentence.strip(". ") + "."` removes leading and trailing spaces and periods. It also ensures each sentence ends with a single period. Furthermore, `if sentence.strip(". ") != ""` discards any empty sentences. This simple example doesn't address other punctuation that may terminate a sentence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Because the user will be modifying responses, whitespaces and punctuation may vary. The code `sentence.strip(". ") + "."` removes leading and trailing spaces and periods. It also ensures that each sentence ends with a single period. Furthermore, the code `if sentence.strip(". ") != ""` discards any empty sentences. This simple example doesn't address other punctuation that may terminate a sentence.
```

> 1. Create a boolean list of sentence validations. Use `True` for an approved sentence, and `False` for an unapproved sentence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a Boolean list of sentence validations, using `True` for an approved sentence, and `False` for an unapproved sentence.
```

   ```python
       validation_list = [
           True if sentence.count(" ") > 4 else False for sentence in response_sentences
       ]
   ```

>    As stated previously, a "good" sentence has at least six words (i.e., at least five spaces). Use list comprehension to count the spaces in each sentence, and save a boolean value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   As stated previously, a "good" sentence has at least six words (i.e., at least five spaces). This code uses list comprehension to count the spaces in each sentence and saves a Boolean value.
```
Is this another instruction step, or does it describe the preceding code? I added some text for clarity.

> 1. Finally, return the sentence and validation lists as a tuple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Return the sentence and validation lists as a tuple:
```

   ```python
       return response_sentences, validation_list
   ```

### Create a helper function to highlight text

To show your validation results to your user, you can highlight sentences that are marked as errors. Create a helper function to add text and background color to the detected errors.

> <Collapse title="Complete function to highlight errors" expanded={false}>

Reviewer: Again, is this just an example code block?

```python
def add_highlights(response_sentences, validation_list, bg="red", text="red"):
    return [
        f":{text}[:{bg}-background[" + sentence + "]]" if not is_valid else sentence
        for sentence, is_valid in zip(response_sentences, validation_list)
    ]
```

</Collapse>

1. Define a function that accepts the lists of sentences and their validations. Include parameters for the text and background colors of the highlight.

   ```python
   def add_highlights(response_sentences, validation_list, bg="red", text="red"):
   ```

>    For convenience, use a default of `"red"` for the highlight colors. You'll use this function to highlight all errors in red when summarizing the validation. If the user chooses to step through the errors one by one, you'll highlight all the errors in gray (except the one in focus).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For convenience, use a default of `"red"` for the highlight colors. You'll use this function to highlight all errors in red when summarizing the validation. If the user chooses to step through the errors individually, you'll highlight all the errors in gray (except the one in focus).
```

   - `st.session_state.history` stores the conversation history as a list of messages. Each message is a dictionary of message attributes (`"role"` and `"content"`).
   - `st.session_state.pending` stores the next response before it is approved.
   - `st.session_state.validation` stores the validation information for the pending response. This is a dictionary with the keys `"sentences"` and `"valid"` to store the lists of sentences and their validations, respectively.

1. Iterate through the messages in your chat history and display their contents in chat message containers.

   ```python
   for message in st.session_state.history:
       with st.chat_message(message["role"]):
           st.write(message["content"])
   ```

### Define the `"user"` stage

When `st.session_state.stage` is `"user"`, the app is waiting for a new prompt.

1. Start a conditional block for the `"user"` stage.

   ```python
   if st.session_state.stage == "user":
   ```

1. Display a chat input widget, and start a nested conditional block from its output.

   ```python
       if user_input := st.chat_input("Enter a prompt"):
   ```

>    This nested block won't execute until a user submits a prompt. When the app first loads (or returns to the `"user"` stage after finalizing a response), this is effectively the end of the script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This nested block won't be executed until a user submits a prompt. When the app first loads (or returns to the `"user"` stage after finalizing a response), this is effectively the end of the script.
```

   The `:=` notation is shorthand to assign a variable within an expression.

1. Append the user prompt to the chat history and display it in a chat message container.

   ```python
           st.session_state.history.append({"role": "user", "content": user_input})
           with st.chat_message("user"):
               st.write(user_input)
   ```

> 1. After the user's chat message container, display the chat response in another chat message container. Save the complete streamed response as a pending message in Session State.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Following the user's chat message container, display the chat response in another chat message container. Save the complete streamed response as a pending message in Session State.
```

### Define the `"validate"` stage

When `st.session_state.stage` is `"validate"`, the app will validate the pending response and display the results to the user. The user will then choose how to proceed (accept, correct, or rewrite the response).

1. Start a conditional block for the `"validate"` stage.

   ```python
   elif st.session_state.stage == "validate":
   ```

   You can use `if` or `elif` for each of the stages. Everywhere you update the stage in Session State, you will immediately rerun the app. Therefore, you'll never execute two different stages in the same script run.

1. For visual consistency, display a disabled chat input.

   ```python
       st.chat_input("Accept, correct, or rewrite the answer above.", disabled=True)
   ```

   For the user's clarity, use placeholder text to direct them to review the pending response.

1. Parse the response and highlight any errors using your helper functions.

   ```python
       response_sentences, validation_list = validate(st.session_state.pending)
       highlighted_sentences = add_highlights(response_sentences, validation_list)
   ```

> 1. Join the highlighted sentences into a single string, and display them in a chat message container. To separate the response from the buttons which will follow, add a divider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Join the highlighted sentences into a single string, and display them in a chat message container. To separate the response from the buttons that follow, add a divider.
```

   ```python
               st.session_state.history.append(
                   {"role": "assistant", "content": st.session_state.pending}
               )
               st.session_state.pending = None
               st.session_state.validation = {}
   ```

1. Update the stage to `"user"`, and rerun the app.

   ```python
               st.session_state.stage = "user"
               st.rerun()
   ```

   If the user clicks the "**Accept**" button, the app will rerun and execute this block. At the end of this block, the app will rerun again and return to the `"user"` stage.

1. In the third column, start a conditional block, and display a tertiary-type button labeled "Rewrite answer."

   ```python
           if cols[2].button("Rewrite answer", type="tertiary"):
   ```

1. Within the conditional block, update the stage to `"rewrite"` and rerun the app.

   ```python
               st.session_state.stage = "rewrite"
               st.rerun()
   ```

   If the user clicks the "**Rewrite answer**" button, the app will rerun and execute this conditional block. At the end of this block, the app will rerun again and enter the `"rewrite"` stage.

>    You don't need to save any information into `st.session_state.validation` since the `"rewrite"` stage does not use this information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You don't need to save any information into `st.session_state.validation` because the `"rewrite"` stage does not use this information.
```

### Define the `"correct"` stage

> When `st.session_state.stage` is `"correct"`, the user can correct or accept the errors identified in `st.session_state.validation`. With each script run, the app focuses the user on the first error in the list. When the user addresses an error, the error removed from the list, and the next error is highlighted in the next script run. This continues until all errors are removed. Then, the user can accept the result, return to the `"validate"` stage, or go to the `"rewrite"` stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `st.session_state.stage` is `"correct"`, the user can correct or accept the errors identified in `st.session_state.validation`. With each script run, the app focuses the user on the first error in the list. When the user addresses an error, the error is removed from the list, and the next error is highlighted in the next script run. This continues until all errors are removed. Then, the user can accept the result, return to the `"validate"` stage, or go to the `"rewrite"` stage.
```

1. Start a conditional block for the `"correct"` stage.

   ```python
   elif st.session_state.stage == "correct":
   ```

1. For visual consistency, display a disabled chat input.

   ```python
       st.chat_input("Accept, correct, or rewrite the answer above.", disabled=True)
   ```

1. For coding convenience, retrieve the validation information from Session State and save it into variables.

   ```python
       response_sentences = st.session_state.validation["sentences"]
       validation_list = st.session_state.validation["valid"]
   ```

1. Use your helper function to highlight the sentences with errors. Use gray for the highlight.

   ```python
       highlighted_sentences = add_highlights(
           response_sentences, validation_list, "gray", "gray"
       )
   ```

>    In a following step, to focus the user on one error, you'll change the highlight color for one sentence.

Author: FYI, this is a deliberate violation of the why, where, what order. I treated where (in this tutorial) as a higher priority of the why, where, what of the user action because they are different in scope. 😄

> 1. Check if there are any errors in `validation_list`. If there are errors, get the index of the first one, and replace the Markdown highlight for the associated sentence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check whether there are any errors in `validation_list`. If there are errors, get the index of the first one, and replace the Markdown highlight for the associated sentence.
```

   ```python
       if not all(validation_list):
           focus = validation_list.index(False)
           highlighted_sentences[focus] = ":red[:red" + highlighted_sentences[focus][11:]
   ```

   `highlighted_sentences[focus]` begins with `":gray[:gray-background["`. Therefore, `highlighted_sentences[focus][11:]` removes the first eleven characters so you can prepend `":red[:red"` instead.

1. Set a fallback value for `focus` for when there are no errors.

   ```python
       else:
           focus = None
   ```

> 1. In a chat message container, display the highlighted response. To separate the response from the buttons which will follow, add a divider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In a chat message container, display the highlighted response. To separate the response from the buttons that follow, add a divider.
```

### Define the `"rewrite"` stage

When `st.session_state.stage` is `"rewrite"`, the user can freely edit the response in a text area.

1. Start a conditional block for the `"rewrite"` stage.

   ```python
   elif st.session_state.stage == "rewrite":
   ```

1. For visual consistency, display a disabled chat input.

   ```python
       st.chat_input("Accept, correct, or rewrite the answer above.", disabled=True)
   ```

1. To let the user edit the pending response, in a chat message container, display a text area input.

   ```python
       with st.chat_message("assistant"):
           new = st.text_area("Rewrite the answer", value=st.session_state.pending)
   ```

   `value=st.session_state.pending` prefills the text area input with the pending response. The user can edit it or replace the text entirely.

1. Start a conditional block, and display a primary-type button labeled "Update." Disable the button if text area input is empty.

   ```python
           if st.button(
               "Update", type="primary", disabled=new is None or new.strip(". ") == ""
           ):
   ```

> 1. Within the conditional block, add the new response to the chat history, and clear the pending and validation information from Session State..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Within the conditional block, add the new response to the chat history, and clear the pending and validation information from Session State..
```
A colon or a period, but not two!

   ```python
               st.session_state.history.append({"role": "assistant", "content": new})
               st.session_state.pending = None
               st.session_state.validation = {}
   ```

1. Update the stage to `"user"`, and rerun the app.

   ```python
               st.session_state.stage = "user"
               st.rerun()
   ```

   If the user clicks the "**Update**" button, the app will rerun and execute this block. At the end of this block, the app will rerun again and return to the `"user"` stage.

1. Save your file and go to your browser to try your new app.

## Improve the example

> Now that you have a working app, you can iteratively improve it. Since there are some common elements between stages, you may want to introduce additional functions to reduce duplicate code. You can use callbacks with the buttons so the app doesn't rerun twice in a row. Alternatively, you can handle more edge cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have a working app, you can iteratively improve it. Because there are some common elements between stages, you might want to introduce additional functions to reduce duplicate code. You can use callbacks with the buttons so the app doesn't rerun twice in a row. Alternatively, you can handle more edge cases.
```

> The example includes some protection against saving an empty response, but it isn't comprehensive. If every sentence in a response is marked as an error, a user can remove each of them in the `"correct"` stage and accept the empty result. Try disabling the "**Accept**" button in the `"correct"` stage if the response is empty or changing it to "**Rewrite**."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example includes some protection against saving an empty response, but it isn't comprehensive. If every sentence in a response is marked as an error, a user can remove each of them in the `"correct"` stage and accept the empty result. If the response is empty, consider disabling the "**Accept**" button in the `"correct"` stage or changing it to "**Rewrite**."
```

To see another edge case, try this in the running example:

1. Submit a prompt.
1. Select "**Rewrite answer**."

> 1. In the text area, highlight all text and press delete. Do not click or tab outside of the text area.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the text area, highlight all text, and press :kbd:Delete. Do not click or tab outside of the text area.
```
I don't know enough about formatting keyboard actions in rst, but this is what Doug listed in [Basic Formatting (reStructuredText)](https://snowflakecomputing.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DOC/pages/46269432/Basic+Formatting+reStructuredText#BasicFormatting(reStructuredText)-FormattingText(Bold,Emphasis,etc.) )

> 1. Immediatly click "**Update**."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Immediately click "**Update**."
```

When you click a button with an unsubmitted value in another widget, Streamlit will update that widget's value and the button's value in succession before triggering the rerun. Because there isn't a rerun between updating the text area and updating the button, the "**Update**" button doesn't get disabled as expected. To correct this, you can add an extra check for an empty text area within the `"rewrite"` stage:

```diff
-       if st.button(
-           "Update", type="primary", disabled=new is None or new.strip(". ") == ""
-       ):
+       is_empty = new is None or new.strip(". ") == ""
+       if st.button("Update", type="primary", disabled=is_empty) and not is_empty:
            st.session_state.history.append({"role": "assistant", "content": new})
            st.session_state.pending = None
            st.session_state.validation = {}
            st.session_state.stage = "user"
            st.rerun()
```

> Now, if you repeat the steps mentioned previously, when the app reruns, the conditional block won't be executed even though the button triggered the rerun. The button will be disabled and the user can proceed as if they had just clicked or tabbed out of the text area.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, if you repeat the listed steps, when the app reruns, the conditional block won't be executed even though the button triggered the rerun. The button will be disabled, and the user can proceed as if they had just clicked or tabbed out of the text area.
```
